<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI: Fourth Trial of the Ring</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Fourth Trial of the Ring</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">The Echo</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>While the prattle of the Toys employed the academy, in other companies it became the news of the day, and the subject of the morrow, and of several succeeding days. It was an inexhaustible text. True facts were blended with false; everything went down, the prodigy had removed all incredulity. In conversation people lived on it upwards of six months.</p>
			<p>The Sultan had made but three trials of his ring; and yet, in a circle of ladies who were allowed a stool at the Manimonbanda’s, one of them related a discourse held by the Toy of a president’s lady, next that of a marchioness, then she disclosed the pious secrets of a devotee, <i xml:lang="it">infine</i> those of several women who were not there: and God knows the stories that were father’d on their Toys; nor was there any parsimony of smutty tales. From facts they came to reflections. “I must confess,” says one of those ladies, “that this witchcraft (for it is a spell cast on Toys) keeps us in a cruel state. How! to be eternally under apprehensions of hearing an impertinent voice issuing from one’s self.”</p>
			<p>“But madam,” answered another, “this fright astonishes us with regard to you. When a Toy has nothing ridiculous to tell, what does it signify, whether it be silent or speak?”</p>
			<p>“It signifies so much,” replied the first, “that I would freely give half my jewels, to be assured that mine will never speak.”</p>
			<p>“Surely,” replied the second, “there must be substantial reasons for keeping measures with people, to purchase their discretion at so high a price.”</p>
			<p>“I have not better reasons than another,” said Cephisa: “and yet I do not eat my words. Twenty thousand crowns, is not too large a sum to buy tranquillity: for I will frankly own, that I have not more confidence in my Toy than in my mouth, and many silly things have slipt from me in my life. I hear every day so many incredible adventures unveiled, attested, detailed by Toys, that even retrenching three fourths, the remaining part is sufficient to destroy a reputation. If mine should prove but half so great a liar as all those, I should be ruined. Was it not enough then that our conduct was in the power of our Toys, without our reputation being dependent on their discourses?”</p>
			<p>“For my part,” answered Ismene smartly, without entering into endless arguments, “I allow things to go their own way. If it be Brama, that has given the faculty of speech to Toys, as my Bramin has convinced me, he will not suffer them to lie. It would be impious to assert the contrary. Wherefore my Toy may talk as often and much as it will. But after all what will it say?”</p>
			<p>Then was heard a hollow voice, which seemed to come out of the ground, and answered by way of Echo: <em>Many things</em>. Ismene, not imagining whence the answer proceeded, flew into a passion, attack’d her neighbours, and increased the diversion of the company. The Sultan, charmed with her mistake, quitted his minister, with whom he was in conference in a corner, went to her, and said: “I am afraid, madam, you have heretofore admitted some one of these ladies into your confidence, and that their Toys are so malicious as to recollect histories, which your own might have forgot.”</p>
			<p>At the same time, by moving his ring up and down with dexterity, Mangogul caused a very singular dialogue between the lady and her Toy. Ismene, who had always conducted her little affairs well enough, and had never had a confidante, answer’d the Sultan, that all the art of calumniators would be ineffectual.</p>
			<p>“<em>Perhaps</em>,” answer’d the unknown voice.</p>
			<p>“How, perhaps,” reply’d Ismene, piqued at this injurious doubt, “what have I to fear from them?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Everything, if they knew as much as I.</em>”</p>
			<p>“And what do you know?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Many things, I tell you.</em>”</p>
			<p>“Many things, that says much, but means nothing. Can you tell any particulars?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Without doubt.</em>”</p>
			<p>“And of what nature? Have I been really in Love?”</p>
			<p>“<em>No.</em>”</p>
			<p>“Have I had intrigues, adventures?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Exactly.</em>”</p>
			<p>“And with whom, pray? With Petits-maîtres, military men, senators?”</p>
			<p>“<em>No.</em>”</p>
			<p>“Comedians?”</p>
			<p>“<em>No.</em>”</p>
			<p>“You shall see, it was with my pages, my footmen, my confessor, or my husband’s chaplain.”</p>
			<p>“<em>No.</em>”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Impostor, you are at your wits end?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Not quite.</em>”</p>
			<p>“Yet I can see no other person, with whom one can possibly have adventures. Was it before, was it after my marriage? Answer me then, impertinent.”</p>
			<p>“<em>Ah, madam, spare invectives, if you please. Compel not the best of your friends to take some disagreeable steps.</em>”</p>
			<p>“Speak, my dear, tell, tell all. I value your services as little as I fear your indiscretion. Explain yourself: I not only give you full permission, but even dare you to it.”</p>
			<p>“<em>To what do you reduce me, Ismene?</em>” said the Toy, breathing a deep sigh.</p>
			<p>“To render justice to virtue.”</p>
			<p>“<em>Well then, virtuous Ismene, have you quite forgot young Osmin, the sangiac Zegris, your dancing master Alaziel, your music master Almoura?</em>”</p>
			<p>“Ah! what horrid calumnies,” cried Ismene. “I had a mother, who was too vigilant to expose me to such irregularities: and my husband, were he here, would testify that he found me just such as he could wish.”</p>
			<p>“<em>Very true</em>,” replied the Toy, “<em>thanks to the secret of your intimate friend Alcina.</em>”</p>
			<p>“This is so extravagantly and so grossly ridiculous,” said Ismene, “that it deserves no refutation. I cannot say,” continued she, “which of these ladies’ Toys it is, that pretends to be so knowing in my affairs: but it has related things, of which my own does not know a syllable.”</p>
			<p>“Madam,” answered Cephisa, “I can assure you, that mine has gone no farther than giving ear.” The rest said as much, and they sat down to play, without precisely knowing the interlocutor of the conversation above related.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
